# Lecture 9: Mathematical Induction

## Induction - why should you care?

- Induction is vital technique for proofs in CS and maths.
- It's particularly useful for proving things about:
  - algorithms that involve recursion (loops)
  - strings and similar data structures
  - trees and similar data structures.
- Understanding induction can help you better understand these recursive
  algorithms and recursive data structures.

### Question

Prove that, for each integer $n \geq 3$, the sum of the angles of a convex
_n_-sided polygon is $180n - 360$ degrees.

**Polygon:** A 2D shape with straight sides.

**Convex:** Any line between two corners is completely inside the shape.

The sum of the angles of a convex 3-sided polygon is 180 degrees so the
statement is true for $n=3$.

The sum of the angles of a convex 4-sided polygon is 460 degrees so the
statement is true for $n=4$.

The sum of the angles of a convex 5-sided polygon is 540 degrees so the
statement is true for $n=5$.

The sum of the angles of a convex 6-sided polygon is 720 degrees so the
statement is true for $n=6$.

**Solution:** Let $P(n)$ be the statement "the sum of the angles of a convex
_n_-sided polygon is $180n - 360$ degrees.

_First we show that the statement is true for $n=3$_

**Base Step.** The sum of the angles of a convex 3-sided polygon is 180 degrees
so _P(3)_ is true.

_Now we should that **if** P(k) is true for some integer $k \geq 3$, **then**
$P(k+1)$ is also true._

**Induction step.**

- Suppose that _P(k)_ is true.
- Any convex _(k+1)_-sided polygon can be "split" into a _k_-sided polygon and a
  triangle.
- The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees.
- The sum of the angles of a _k_-sided polygon is $180k - 360$ degrees (by
  $P(k)$).
- So the sum of the angles of a $(k+1)$-sided polygon is $180 + (180k - 360) =
  180(k+1) - 360$ degrees. So $P(k+1)$ is true.

_This proves the original statement!_

### Question

Since the natural numbers $0,1,2,3,\dots$ are generated by a process which
begins with 0 and repeatedly adds 1, we have the following.

Property _P_ for all natural numbers if

1. $P(0)$ is true.
2. $P(k) \Rightarrow P(k+1)$ for all $k \in \mathbb{N}$.

This is called the _principle of mathematical induction._

It is used in a style of proof called _proof by induction_, which consists of
two steps.

**Base step:** Proof that the required property _P_ is true for 0.

**Induction step:** Proof that **if** $P(k)$ is true **then** $P(k+1)$ is true,
for each $k \in \mathbb{N}$

To prove that some statement $P(n)$ is true for all integers $n \geq 0$.

- prove $P(0)$ is true (called the base step); then
- prove that, for each integer $k \geq 0$, **if** $P(k)$ is true **then**
  $P(k+1)$ is true (called the induction step).

| n      | 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | $\dots$ |
|--------|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---------|
| $P(n)$ | T | T | T | T | T | T | T | T | T | $\dots$ |

We usually prove the induction step by **assuming that** $P(k)$ **is true** for
an arbitrary $k$ and then using this to prove that $P(k+1)$ is true.
